---
layout: post
title: Quick Python Virtual Environments
feature-img:
---

This past week I was cleaning up a project at work, that was coming to a good stopping point. When I realized that I hadn't really encapsulated all my work in a virtual environment so others could also give it a go.

I should have started my work by creating a virtual env but oh well. So just a few quick reminders/tips.

Create the virtual environment with the no site packages option so it doesn't see all global libraries. Otherwise jupyter will recognize all global libraries brought in my pip.


```bash
virtualenv --no-site-packages -p /usr/local/bin/python3 .env
```

For python2 '/usr/local/bin/python'.

### Git Ignore Files

Storing the all the environment variables in the .env will be helpful later(gitignore). Note this command assumes you are already in the parent directory for which you are creating the environment.

In your .gitignore file toss in `env/`, and this will ignore all those files when pushing to git. This is the advantage of placing all the files in env.

Also a side note, i hate ipynb_checkpoints and so i tossed that in gitignore as well `,ipynb_checkpoints` and it recognizes and ignores them all.

### Requirements - Libraries

There is a quick and easy way to stick all your installed libraries within the environment in a file to maintain reproducability.

```bash
pip freeze > requirements.txt
```

Hopefully you get as much out of this as I do. I'll probably reference this a 100 times over in the future.
