---
layout: post
title: Building a Python Package
feature-img:
---

I had the privilege of building some Python packages for work. It was one of the tasks on my personal to-do list that I never really got to. Thankfully work changed that for me!

I've learnt a lot building this package from my own experiences as well as external links and felt the need to document this process. Don't want to forget this in the future, ha!

### Common rules of thumb:
- Package name should be all lowercase  
- Use an underscore for a word separator  
- Unique names help, especially if you plan to make it public

### Basic Directory Structure

First thing to really understand is the structure of the package (at a directory level) and also the necessary files.

root  
└── funpypkg   
    ├── __init__.py  
    ├── setup.py   
    ├── class.py   
    ├── data  
    │   ├── something.csv   
    │   └── something2.csv   
    ├── README.md   
    └── requirements.txt   

Each individual file has its own use and expectations, for use in a python package.

#### class.py

So in class.py, you can put any of your code in that you want users to access via the package. Treat this as regular python code, imports at the top of the file, followed by code.

If you decide to use the OOP structure for your code, say the name of your class is Read_files, then the corresponding .py script should be named read_files.

Also in the class structure, there will be an __init__ module. This is where I learnt the importance of relative paths for python packages, which thinking back on it is a no-brainer but at the time I didn't understand. The relative paths are especially important if you plan to load data (csv files, sklearn models, etc).

```python
import os
import pandas as pd

def __init__(self):
  self.this_dir, self.this_filename = os.path.split(__file__)
  all_deets_path = os.path.join(self.this_dir, "data","something.csv")
  self.something_dat = pd.read_csv(all_deets_path)
```

`self.this_dir` will store the director that the package is installed with and can be combined with `os.path.join` to load external data and models in the package.

#### requirements.txt

So most people work in virtual environments when working on specific packages. It's a pretty good practice, something I was introduced to fairly recently.

However, even with the use of a virtual environment. Sometimes you are using that project/repo/directory as a sandbox and test out a lot of methods. In those cases the requirements.txt file might be too large and unnecessary for the python package.

Hell this is helpful if you are just working off your global environment too.

Welcome to `pipreqs`. It's a python package that can be retrieved via pip. Following that you can use it to read through your code and output a requirements file.

From the root directory, one above the package directory, run this:

```bash
pip install pipreqs
pipreqs funpypkg
```

Next up, the init and setup files

#### INIT file

There are a bunch of posts about what to or not to put in the __init__.py

What worked best for me was:

from PackageName.ScriptFile import Class name

```python
from pkgname.classscriptname import Classname
```

#### Setup file

The setup file is what ingests the information and builds the package. After the setup file is build, I ran

```bash
python setup.py install
```

BAM, my package was installed on my machine. This was the coolest thing to me. Just like the __init__.py file, there are bunch of standards on what to fill out. I would just follow one of those.

A few notes on arguments for the setup function, from setuptools.

`install_requires = [required]`, I defined required as follows:

```python
with open('requirements.txt') as f:
    required = f.read().splitlines()
```

Additionally (if including data in your package), do not use the `include_package_data` argument in the setup function. It doesn't work as anticipated. Your data will still be included without this argument.


#### README

A few examples of what the package contains, and its capability are always appreciated. At least, I'm able to learn more about how to use the package than having to dig in the source code.

This was a fun learning experience, and I hope I can leverage this knowledge to put together a python package similar to `collegeballR` in R.

I'm sure there is a bunch more to learn in this process, and I will continuously update this. If you have any recommendations or tips, I'd love to learn more!
