---
layout: post
title: Quick Git Reference
feature-img:
---

I've started to focus on moving away from sourcetree and github desktop, GUI interfaces for git.
Just going to use this as my personal reference for git commands. I'm tired of searching for Stack overflow links.


### Basic commands

```bash
git status
git pull
```

Git status will list all new files and modified files already under version control.

General structure for committing and pushing changes up to the origin branch.

```bash
git add [filename]
git commit -m "enter message"
git push
```

Branches

```bash
git branch
git checkout branch_name
```

The first one lists all branches in the repo, and the second command will move you to a specific branch in which work can be done.

Creating new branches

```bash
git checkout -b [name_of_branch]
git push origin [name_of_branch]
```

The first command creates a new branch locally, and the second will create an upstream copy of this branch.

### Correcting Mistakes

Sometimes mistakes happen and I look to correct them. A fine example of this is reversing a commit.

```bash
git reset --soft HEAD^
git reset --hard HEAD^ 
```

Use soft, if you want to keep the local changes. Use hard, if you don't want to keep local changes either.

### Untracked files 

I find that when running git status, there are a lot of untracked files that move with me from branch to branch. I need to commit and stash as neccessary within the correct branches.

**Not Risky Way**

Stash my changes. 

```bash
git stash
git stash drop
git checkout B
```

If I don't drop my stashed changes, I can get this back. 


**Super Risky Way**

Note, I did this already once. I should have staged my changes instead. 

When switching branches or checking out another set of commits, you might want to only have the files and directories that are a part of that actual version. The commands shown above will accomplish this.

Be warned that any untracked files will be deleted, along with changes to tracked files. The two commands together reset the
index and working tree, so ensure that any changes you don't want to lose were either committed to another branch or otherwise backed up somehow.

```bash
git clean -f -d
```

http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/v1.7.6/git-clean.html
-d
Remove untracked directories in addition to untracked files. If an untracked directory is managed by a different git repository, it is not removed by default. Use -f option twice if you really want to remove such a directory.
